Road Map BS (Computer Science) Session 2022-26  
Semester 1 Semester 2 
Course 
Code Course Title Credit 
Hours 
AAF-302 Financial Accounting 3(3-0) 
ISL-311 Translation of The Holy Quran-I 1(1-0) 
CSI-321 Introduction to Computing 
Applications 3(2-1) 
ISL-321 Islamic Studies/Ethics 2(2-0) 
ENG-322 English Composition & 
Comprehension 
3(3-0) 
MTH-323 Calculus & Analytical Geometry 3(3-0) 
ECO-408 Issues in Pakistan Economy 3(3-0) 
 Total 18(17-1) 
 
Course 
Code Course Title Credit 
Hours 
CSI-302 Programming Fundamentals 4(3-1) 
CSI-304 Discrete Structures 3(3-0) 
PST-321 Pakistan Studies  2(2-0) 
MTH
324 Multi-variate Calculus 3(3-0) 
ELE-401 Digital Logic Design 4(3-1) 
ENG-422 Technical Writing 3(3-0) 
 Total 19(17-2) 
 
Semester 3 Semester 4 
 
Course 
Code Course Title Credit 
Hours 
STA-321 Introduction to Statistical Theory 3(3-0) 
PHY-323 Basic Electronics 3(2-1) 
SWE-401 Introduction to Software Engineering 3(3-0) 
CSI-401 Object Oriented Programming 4(3-1) 
CSI-405 Computer Networks 4(3-1) 
ISL-411 Translation of The Holy Quran-II 1(1-0) 
MTH-423 Differential Equations 3(3-0) 
 Total  21(18-3) 
 
Course 
Code Course Title Credit 
Hours 
CSI-402 Data Structure and Algorithms 4(3-1) 
CSI-406 Computer Organization and Assembly 
Language 
4(3-1) 
CSI-408 Database Systems 4(3-1) 
CSI-410 Wireless Communication 3(3-0) 
CSI-412 Numerical Computing 3(3-0) 
 Total 18(15-3) 
 
Semester 5 
 
Semester 6 
Course 
Code Course Title Credit 
Hours 
ENG-421 Communication  Skills 3(3-0) 
MTH-424 Linear Algebra 3(3-0) 
CSI-501 Web Design and Development 3(2-1) 
CSI-503 Professional Practices 3(3-0) 
CSI-505 Operating Systems 4(3-1) 
ISL-511 Translation of The Holy Quran-III 1(1-0) 
 Total 17(15-2) 
 
Course 
Code Course Title Credit 
Hours 
CSI-502 Artificial Intelligence 4(3-1) 
CSI-504 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3(3-0) 
CSI-506 Theory of Automata 3(3-0) 
CSI-508 Fundamentals of Data Mining 3(3-0) 
CSI-512 Distributed Database Systems 3(2-1) 
 Total 16(14-2) 
 
Semester 7 Semester 8 
Course 
Code Course Title Credit 
Hours 
SOC-307 Introduction to Sociology  3(3-0) 
CSI-601 Mobile and Application 
Development 
3(2-1) 
CSI-603 Parallel and Distributed Computing 3(3-0) 
CSI-605 Compiler Construction 3(3-0) 
ISL-611 Translation of The Holy Quran-IV 1(1-0) 
CSI-630A Project(Proposal) 2(0-2) 
 Total 15(12-3) 
 
Course 
Code Course Title Credit 
Hours 
CSI-602 Computer Graphics 3(2-1) 
CSI-604 Information Security 3(3-0) 
xxx-xxx Foreign Language* 3(3-0) 
*Department can offer any one of the following 
languages Chinese , French, German, English, Persion, 
Arabic 
CSI-630B   Project(Final) 4(0-4) 
 Total 13(8-5) 
 
 
Grand Total= 137 
Semester-1 
Credit Hours: 3 
Course Name: Introduction to Computing Applications 
Course Structure: Lectures: 2, Labs: 1 
Prerequisites: None (first semester course) 
Objectives:  
This course focuses on a breadth-first coverage of the use of computing and communication 
technologies to solve real life problems; including computing environments, general 
application software like word processing, visual presentation applications, tabular data 
manipulation,  DBMS, WWW, Email management systems, Virus, Anti-Virus and Spam 
Protection; Introduction to the basic computing hardware (main building blocks), operating 
systems, data networks; software engineering and communication technology along with 
social and ethical issues. An introduction of the program of study in computing for which 
this course is being taught (CS, IT, SE etc.). The course attempts to provide every student a 
set of productivity tools that they will be able to use for the rest of their lives. 
Course Outline: 
Number Systems, Binary numbers, Boolean logic, History computer system, basic machine 
organization, Von Neumann Architecture, Algorithm definition, design, and implementation, 
Programming paradigms and languages, Graphical programming, Overview of Software 
Engineering and Information Communication Technology, Operating system, Compiler, 
DBMS, Computer networks and internet, WWW, web mail applications, Computer graphics, 
AI,  Viruses and Anti-Viruses, Use of office productivity tools, such as word processors, 
spreadsheets, presentation applications, etc., Social, Ethical, Professional and Legal Issues, 
and overview of the complete program of studies in computing and its structure. 
Suggested Text Book: 
1. Introduction to Computers by Peter Norton, 6th Edition, McGraw-Hill SiE, ISBN 0-07
059374-4. 
Reference Material: 
1. Computers: Information Technology in Perspective, 9/e by Larry Long and Nancy Long, 
Prentice Hall, 2002/ISBN: 0130929891. 
2. An Invitation to Computer Science, Schneider and Gersting, Brooks/Cole Thomson 
Learning, 2000. 
3. Information System Today by Leonard Jessup, Joseph Valacich. 
4. Computers Today by Suresh K. Basandra. 
5. Computer Science: An overview of Computer Science, Sherer. 
 
 
 
 
Course Name: Calculus and Analytic Geometry 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: None 
Objectives: To provide foundation and basic ground for calculus and analytical geometry 
background. 
Course Outline: Complex Numbers, DeMoivre’s Theorem and its Applications, Simple 
Cartesian Curves, Functions and Graphs, Symmetrical Properties, Curve Tracing, Limit 
and Continuity, Differentiation of Functions. Derivative as Slope of Tangent to a Curve 
and as Rate of Change, Application to Tangent and Normal, Linearization, 
Maxima/Minima and Point of Inflexion, Taylor and Maclaurin Expansions and their 
convergence. Integral as Anti-derivative, Indefinite Integration of Simple Functions. 
Methods of Integration: Integration by Substitution, by Parts, and by Partial Fractions, 
Definite Integral as Limit of a Sum, Application to Area, Arc Length, Volume and 
Surface of Revolution. 
Reference Material: 
1. Swokowski, Olinick and Pence, Calculus and Analytical Geometry, 6th edition, 1994, 
Brooks/Cole Publishers. 
2. Howard Anton, Calculus, 7th edition. 2002, John Wiley and Sons (WIE). 
3. William E. Boyce Richard C. Diprima, Calculus, John Wiley & Sons, ISBN: 
0471093335. 
4. Thomas Finny, Calculus and Analytical Geometry, 10th edition, John Wiley and 
Sons. 
5. Erwin Kreyzig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 7th edition, 1993, John Wiley & 
Sons Inc. 
 
Course Name: Financial Accounting 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: None 
Objectives: The primary aim of Financial Accounting is to provide students with an 
introduction to the process and function of financial reporting. Whilst a large proportion 
of the course is aimed at understanding accounting as a process, taking a preparers‟ 
perspective, we will also seek to develop an understanding of the importance of the role 
of accounting in today society. 
Course Outline: 
Accounting and its role, Development of accounting, Accounting Theory and Conceptual 
framework, Accounting Defined, Why study Accounting, Financial statements, Major 
fields of Accounting, Accounting as a Career, Basic Accounting Concepts, The Entity 
Concept, The Reliability (or Objectivity) principle, The cost Principle, The Going
Concern Assumptions , The Stable Currency Assumptions, Ethics-the-Most Fundamental 
Principle of Accounting, Qualitative characteristics of Financial statements, The 
recording process, The Recognition Issue, The Valuation Issue, The Classification Issue, 
The Recording Process, Analysis of Transaction, The Journal, The Ledger, Balancing the 
Accounts, Preparation of Financial Statements, Preparing Trial Balance, Locating and 
correcting errors in recording process, Preparing Profit and Loss Account and Balance 
Sheet, The adjusting and closing entries, Need for Adjusting Entries, Recording adjusting 
entries, Preparing adjusted trial balance, Recording closing entries, Preparing post
closing trial balance, Preparing work-sheet, Preparation of Financial Statements, 
Accounting for trading organization, The Purchase Function, Accounting for Purchases 
and Sales, Return and allowances, Periodic System, Perpetual System, Worksheet, 
Preparation of financial Statements, Departmental Accounts, Accounting 
Systems,Developing a System, Subsidiary Journals, Subsidiary ledgers, Cash Book, 
Petty cash book, Control Accounts, Cash and temporary investment, Nature and 
Composition of Cash, Cash Management and Control, Maintaining Bank Account, Bank 
Reconciliation, Short term investments, Accounting for debtors and stock, Accounting 
Treatment of Bad Debts, Direct write-Off Method, Aging Schedule, Percentage of Sales 
Method, Recoveries of Bad debts, Stock, Measurement of Stock Quantity, Measurement 
of Stock Cost, Perpetual Stock System, Periodic Stock System, Accounting for property, 
plant and equipment, Property, Plant and Equipment, Lump-sum Purchase, Subsequent 
Expenditure, Depreciation methods, Revaluation, Review of Useful life, Intangible 
Assets and  Amortization, Wasting Assets and Depletion 
 
Reference Material: 
1. Williams, Haka, Bettner: Financial & Managerial Accounting, Latest Edition, 
Prentice Hall 
2. Professor Muhammad Ammanullah Khan: Financial Accounting, Latest Edition 
3. Frank Wood‟s: Business Accounting 1, Eleventh Edition 
4. Meigs and Meigs, Accounting for Business Decision, 9th Edition/Latest Edition 
 
 
Course Name:  English Composition and Comprehension 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: None 
Objectives: Enhance language skills and develop critical thinking. 
Course Outline: Reading and Study skills, Note –taking on reading,  Precis  writing, 
Critical thinking  skills, Dictionary Skills, Develop your own study reading system 
(detective novels), enhancing vocabulary, For EAP & EFF if they are part of required 
degree 
(Technical writing, Report writing (formal + informal report), writing of research 
proposal, writing of research paper, Interviews, Job interviews (face to face)and 
Telephonic Interviews) 
 READING: Topic sentence, identify main idea, distinguish between Fact & Opinion, 
Skimming & Scanning, SQ3R, Notes taking techniques, Analyzing techniques in 
paragraph structure, identify writer’s intent (cause effect, reasons, comparison & 
contrast), making notes by using different techniques (tables, mind maps, lists, graphs 
etc), comprehension paragraph  
 WRITING:  Self-expression in writing. Difference between Paragraph and Essay 
writing Descriptive, narrative, discursive, argumentative. Comprehension paragraphs 
 ACADEMIC WRITING: How to write a proposal for research paper/term paper. 
Difference between Summary & Review writing (Paragraphing optional). How to 
write a research paper/term paper (emphasis on style, content, language, form, clarity, 
consistency)            
 REPORT WRITING: technical, progressive etc. 
Note: Extensive reading is required for vocabulary building (Newspapers, story books, 
daily writing, learning, movies, magazines and Detective novels). 
Reference Material: 
a) Essay Writing and Academic Writing 
1. Writing. Advanced by Ron White. Oxford Supplementary Skills. Third Impression 
1992. ISBN 0 19 435407 3 (particularly suitable for discursive, descriptive, 
argumentative and report writing). 
2. College Writing Skills by John Langan. Mc=Graw-Hill Higher Education. 2004. 
3. Patterns of College Writing (4th edition) by Laurie G. Kirszner and Stephen R. 
Mandell. St. Martin’s Press. 
b) Presentation Skills 
c) Reading 
1. The Mercury Reader. A Custom Publication. Compiled by norther Illinois University.  
General Editiors: Janice Neulib; Kathleen Shine Cain; Stephen Ruffus and Maurice 
Scharton. (A reader which will give students exposure to the best of twentieth century 
literature, without taxing the taste of engineering students). 
2. Reading and Study Skills by John Langan 
3. Study Skills by Riachard York 
 
 
 
 
Course Name:   Issues in Pakistan Economy 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: None 
Objectives:  
Course Outline:  
Overview of Pakistan Economy  
Development Experience, Approaches, Policies and Outcomes. Identification of Issues: 
The era of 1950’s, 1960’s, 1970’s, 1980’s 1990’s and 2000’s. Structural Change and 
Sources of Growth. Emergence of Economic Issues, Human Resource Development, 
Unemployment, Poverty, Income Distribution, Debt, Deficit etc. Growth with limited 
development in Pakistan.  
Development Planning and Resource Mobilization  
Agricultural Development Policies and Priorities, Major Targets of Develop Plans and 
Emerging Issues; Neglects and Successes: Mobilization of Domestic Resources; 
Shortages, Deficits and Role of Foreign Aid. Agricultural Vs. Industrial Development 
Debate. Agricultural Adequacy.  
Agriculture and Industrial Development: Emerging Issues  
Pattern of Agricultural and Industrial Development, Land Reforms and Its Impacts, the 
Role of Green Revolution and its Impacts: Present Status. Agricultural Price Policy and 
Income Tax. Sectoral Terms of Trade. Industrial Development Policies and Strategies. 
Development of Large and Small Industries. Value Added: Manufacturing Goods Vs. 
Primary Goods Production. Agriculture Vs. Industry: Development Debate.  
Sectoral Development, Employment Pattern and Unemployment  
Sectoral Priorities and Development Issues. Human Resource Development and 
Emerging Issues: Population Growth, Labor Force Participation Rate and Employment 
Pattern, Unemployment and Underemployment, Forecasting Manpower Needs and 
Employment. Strategies to combat unemployment. Criteria to Measure Unemployment / 
Underemployment: Time Criterion, Productivity Criterion and New Index of 
Unemployment: Application to Pakistan and Empirical Evidences. Good Governance, 
Social Action Plan and its Impact. Role of Institution in Development. Social Sectors 
development Vs. High Return Sectors: Growth trade off.  
International Debt and Dependency  
Concepts of Foreign Aid and Debt. Borrowing Vs. Domestic Reserve Mobilization 
(failure). Size of Foreign Debt, Debt Saving and its Impacts. Strategies to combat with 
High Debt: Saving Policy, Foreign Trade Promotion, Cutting non-development 
Expenditures, Rescheduling and its Impacts. Debt Management in Pakistan and Its 
Impacts. Debt Modeling and Future Implications.  
Poverty and Income Distribution  
Pattern of Income Distribution: Rural and Urban. Definitions and Approaches to Measure 
Poverty: Income Approach, Expenditure Approach, Basic Needs Approach, Poverty of 
Participatory Index (POPI). How to Combat Poverty; Growth Strategy, Basic Needs, 
Labor Intensive Investment: Education / Training etc. and Social Action Plan (SAP) , its 
Role and Critical Review, Evasion of Policies / Strategies to Combat Poverty and 
Improving Income Distribution: Critical Evaluation. Neglect of Human Resource 
Development. Child Labor. Factors Productivity Issues.  
Inflation, Foreign Trade Deficit and Emerging Issues  
Sources of Inflation in Pakistan. Policies to Combat Inflation and their Impacts. Trade 
Performance, Instability and its Impacts. Policies to Combat Deficit and Trade Instability. 
WTO and Its Impacts. Reforms and Further Needs. Expected Impacts of WTO and 
Challenges. Terms of Trade Issues, Market Access and Health Related Rates 
 
Reference Material: 
1. Aslam M., Perspective on Development Planning In Pakistan, Allied Book Centre, 
Lahore, 2001-2002.  
2. Chaudhary M. Aslam and Ahmad Eatzaz: Globalization, WTO and Trade 
Liberalization in Pakistan, FerozSons, Lahore (2004).  
3. Chaudhary M. Aslam, Human Resource Development and Management in Pakistan, 
Ferozsons, Lahore (1989).  
4. Khan, Shahrukh R., 50 Years of Pakistan’s Economy – Traditional Topics and 
Contemporary Concerns. Oxford Univ. Press, Karachi (2000).  
5. Mahbool-ul-Haq Centre for Human Development (MHCHD), Poverty Profile of 
Pakistan, (1989) Oxford University Press.  
6. Human Development In South Asia, Annual Report.  
7. Saeed, Khawaja Amjad, The Economy of Pakistan, Karachi: Oxford University Press, 
2004.  
8. Zaidi, Akbar, (1999), Issues in Pakistan Economy, Oxford Univ., Press, Karachi 
 
Course Name:   Islamic Studies/ Ethics 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: None 
Objectives: To provide Basic information about Islamic Studies, To enhance 
understanding of the students regarding Islamic Civilization, To improve Students skill to 
perform prayers and other worships, To enhance the skill of the students for 
understanding of issues related to faith and religious life. 
Course Outline:  
Introduction to Quranic Studies 
1) Basic Concepts of Quran  
2) History of Quran 
3) Uloom-ul -Quran 
Study of Selected Text of Holly Quran 
1) Verses of Surah Al-Baqra Related to Faith(Verse No-284-286) 
2)  Verses of Surah Al-Hujrat Related to Adab Al-Nabi 
 (Verse No-1-18) 
3) Verses of Surah Al-Mumanoon Related to Characteristics of faithful (Verse No-1
11) 
4) Verses of Surah al-Furqan Related to Social Ethics (Verse No.63-77) 
5) Verses of Surah Al-Inam Related to Ihkam(Verse No-152-154) 
Study of Selected Text of Holly Quran 
1) Verses of Surah Al-Ihzab Related to Adab al-Nabi (Verse No.6,21,40,56,57,58.) 
2)  Verses of Surah Al-Hashar (18,19,20) Related to thinking, Day of Judgment  
3) Verses of Surah Al-Saf Related to Tafakar,Tadabar  (Verse No-1,14) 
Seerat of Holy Prophet  (S.A.W) I 
1) Life of Muhammad Bin Abdullah ( Before Prophet Hood) 
2) Life of Holy Prophet (S.A.W) in Makkah 
3) Important Lessons Derived from the life of Holy Prophet in Makkah 
Seerat of Holy Prophet  (S.A.W) II 
1) Life of Holy Prophet (S.A.W) in Madina 
2) Important Events of Life Holy Prophet in  Madina 
3) Important Lessons Derived from the life of Holy Prophet in Madina 
Introduction To Sunnah 
1) Basic Concepts of Hadith  
2) History of Hadith 
3) Kinds of Hadith 
4) Uloom –ul-Hadith 
5) Sunnah & Hadith  
6) Legal Position of Sunnah 
Selected Study from Text of Hadith 
Introduction To Islamic Law & Jurisprudence  
1) Basic Concepts of Islamic Law & Jurisprudence 
2) History & Importance of Islamic Law & Jurisprudence 
3) Sources of Islamic Law & Jurisprudence 
4) Nature of Differences in Islamic Law 
5) Islam and Sectarianism 
Islamic Culture & Civilization 
1) Basic Concepts of Islamic Culture & Civilization 
2) Historical Development of Islamic Culture & Civilization 
3) Characteristics of Islamic Culture & Civilization  
4) Islamic Culture & Civilization and Contemporary Issues 
Islam & Science 
1) Basic Concepts of Islam & Science 
2) Contributions of Muslims in the Development of Science 
3) Quranic & Science 
Islamic Economic System 
1) Basic Concepts of Islamic Economic System 
2) 
3) 
4) 
Means of Distribution of wealth in Islamic Economics 
Islamic Concept of Riba 
Islamic Ways of Trade & Commerce 
Political System of Islam 
1) 
2) 
3) 
Basic Concepts of Islamic Political System  
Islamic Concept of Sovereignty  
Basic Institutions of Govt. in Islam 
Islamic History 
1) 
2) 
3) 
Period of Khlaft-E-Rashida 
Period of Ummayyads 
Period of Abbasids 
Social System of Islam 
1) 
2) 
Basic Concepts of Social System of Islam 
Elements of Family 
Ethical Values of Islam 
Reference Material: 
1) 
2)  
3) 
1) 
5) 
Hameed ullah Muhammad, “Emergence of Islam” , IRI, Islamabad   
Hameed ullah Muhammad, “Muslim Conduct of State” 
Hameed ullah Muhammad, ‘Introduction to Islam 
Mulana Muhammad Yousaf Islahi,” 
Hussain Hamid Hassan, “An Introduction to the Study of Islamic Law” leaf 
Publication Islamabad, Pakistan. 
6) 
Dr. Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, “Introduction to Al Sharia Al Islamia” Allama       
Iqbal Open University, Islamabad (2001) 
Ahmad Hasan, “Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence” Islamic Research    
Institute, International Islamic University, Islamabad (1993) 
7) 
8) 
9) 
Mir Waliullah, “Muslim Jrisprudence and the Quranic Law of Crimes”       
Islamic Book Service (1982) 
H.S. Bhatia, “Studies in Islamic Law, Religion and Society” Deep & Deep       
Publications New Delhi (1989) 
.  
 
Semester-2 
Course Name:   Programming Fundamentals 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 4 
Prerequisites: None 
Objectives: The course is designed to familiarize students with the basic structured 
programming skills. It emphasizes upon problem analysis, algorithm designing, and 
program development and testing. 
Course Outline:  
Overview of computers and programming. Overview of language for e.g. C language C. 
Basics of structured and Modular programming. Basic Algorithms and problem solving, 
development of basic algorithms, analyzing problem, designing solution, testing designed 
solution. Fundamental programming constructs, translation of algorithms to programs, 
data types, control structures, functions, arrays, records, files, testing programs 
Reference Material: 
1. Problem Solving and Program Design in C / 6E Hanly & Koffman  Addison-Wesley  |  
Published: 02/06/2009 ISBN-10: 0321535421  |  ISBN-13: 9780321535429 
2. C How to Program, 5/E  (Harvey & Paul) Deitel & Deitel, ISBN-10: 0132404168 
ISBN-13: 9780132404167 Publisher: Prentice Hall Copyright: 2007 
 
Course Name:   Digital Logic and Design 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 4 
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures, Introduction to Computing 
Objectives: This course introduces the concept of digital logic, gates and the digital 
circuits. Further, it focuses on the design and analysis combinational and sequential 
circuits. It also serves to familiarize the student with the logic design of basic computer 
hardware components. 
Course Outline:  
Overview of Binary Numbers, Boolean Algebra, switching algebra, and logic gates, 
Karnaugh Map and Quin-McCluskey methods,  simplification of Boolean functions, 
Combinational Design; two level NAND/NOR implementation, Tabular Minimization, 
Combinational Logic Design: adders, subtracters, code converters, parity checkers, 
multilevel NAND/NOR/XOR circuits, MSI Components, design and use of encoders, 
decoders, multiplexers, BCD adders, and comparators, Latches and flip-flops, 
Synchronous sequential circuit design and analysis, Registers, synchronous and 
asynchronous counters, and memories, Control Logic Design, Wired logic and 
characteristics of logic gate families, ROMs, PLDs, and PLAs, State Reduction and good 
State Variable Assignments, Algorithmic State Machine (ASM) Charts, Asynchronous 
circuits, Memory systems, Functional organization, Multiprocessor and alternative 
architectures: Introduction to SIMD, MIMD, VLIW, EPIC; systolic architecture; 
interconnection networks; shared memory systems; cache coherence; memory models 
and memory consistency, Performance enhancements, Contemporary architectures 
Reference Material: 
1. Digital Design, 2nd Ed., M. Morris Mano, Prentice Hall, 1991. 
2. Practical Digital Logic Design and Testing, P K Lala, Prentice Hall, 1996 
 
Course Name:   Multivariate Calculus 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Calculus and Analytical Geometry 
Objectives: The goals are to develop the skills to have ground knowledge of multivariate 
calculus and appreciation for their further computer science courses 
Course Outline:  
Functions of Several Variables and Partial Differentiation. Multiple Integrals, Line and 
Surface Integrals. Green’s and Stoke’s Theorem. Fourier Series: periodic functions, 
Functions of any period P-2L, Even & odd functions, Half Range expansions, Fourier 
Transform. Laplace Transform, Z-Transform. 
Reference Material: 
1. James Stewart, Multivariable Calculus, 6th edition, 2007, Cengage Learning 
publishers. 
2. Swokowski, Olinick and Pence, Calculus and Analytical Geometry, 6th edition, 1994, 
Thomson Learning EMEA, Ltd. 
3. Bernard Kolman, William F. Trench, Elementary Multivariable Calculus, 1971, 
Academic Press. 
4. Howard Anton, Albert Herr, Multivariable Calculus, 5th edition, 1995, John Wiley 
 
Course Name:   Discrete Structures 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites:  
Objectives:  
Introduces the foundations of discrete mathematics as they apply to  computer Science, 
focusing on providing a solid theoretical foundation for further work. Further, this course 
aims to develop understanding and appreciation of the finite nature inherent in most 
Computer Science problems and structures through study of combinatorial reasoning, 
abstract algebra, iterative procedures, predicate calculus, tree and graph structures. In this 
course more emphasis shall be given to statistical and probabilistic formulation with 
respect to computing aspects 
Course Outline:  
Introduction to logic and proofs: Direct proofs; proof by contradiction, Sets, 
Combinatorics, Sequences, Formal logic, Prepositional and predicate calculus, Methods 
of Proof, Mathematical Induction and Recursion, loop invariants, Relations and 
functions, Pigeonwhole principle, Trees and Graphs, Elementary number theory, 
Optimization and matching. Fundamental structures: Functions; relations (more 
specifically recursions); pigeonhole principle; cardinality and countability, probabilistic 
methods 
Reference Material: 
1. Kenneth H. Rosen, Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications, 6TH edition, 2006, 
Mcgraw Hill Book Co. 
2. Richard Johnsonbaugh, Discrete Mathematics, 7TH edition, 2008, Prentice Hall 
Publishers. 
3. Kolman, Busby & Ross, Discrete Mathematical Structures, 4th edition, 2000, 
Prentice-Hall Publishers. 
4. Ralph P. Grimaldi, Discrete and Combinatorial Mathematics: An Applied 
Introduction, Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1985 
 
 
 
Course Name:   Pakistan Studies 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites:  
Objectives:  
Develop vision of historical perspective, government, politics, contemporary Pakistan, 
ideological background of Pakistan. • Study the process of governance, national 
development, issues arising in the modern age and posing challenges to Pakistan. 
Course Outline:  
1. Historical Perspective 
a. Ideological rationale with special reference to Sir Syed Ahmed Khan, Allama 
Muhammad Iqbal and Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah.  
b. Factors leading to Muslim separatism 
c. People and Land 
i. Indus Civilization 
ii. Muslim advent 
iii. Location and geo-physical features. 
2. Government and Politics in Pakistan 
Political and constitutional phases: 
a. 1947-58 
b. 1958-71 
c. 1971-77 
d. 1977-88 
e. 1988-99 
f. 1999 onward 
3. Contemporary Pakistan 
a. Economic institutions and issues 
b. Society and social structure 
c. Ethnicity 
d. Foreign policy of Pakistan and challenges 
e. Futuristic outlook of Pakistan 
Reference Material: 
1. Burki, Shahid Javed. State & Society in Pakistan, The Macmillan Press Ltd 1980. 
2. Akbar, S. Zaidi. Issue in Pakistan’s Economy. Karachi: Oxford University Press, 
2000. 
3. S.M. Burke and Lawrence Ziring. Pakistan’s Foreign policy: An Historical analysis. 
Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1993. 
4. Mehmood, Safdar. Pakistan Political Roots & Development. Lahore, 1994. 
5. Wilcox, Wayne.The Emergence of Bangladesh., Washington: American Enterprise, 
Institute of Public Policy Research, 1972. 
6. Mehmood, Safdar. Pakistan Kayyun Toota, Lahore: Idara-e-Saqafat-e-Islamia, Club 
Road, 
 
 
 
Course Name:   Technical Writing 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites:  
Objectives:  
Course Outline:  
Characteristics of Academic, Public, Work and Electronic Communities. Myths and 
Realities about Writing. Effective Writing: Discovering and Planning; Purpose, Thesis, 
and Audience; Drafting: Drafting Collaboratively, Drafting in Digital Environments; 
Revising, Editing, and Proofreading. 
Paragraphs: Unfocused Paragraphs, Incoherent Paragraphs, Poorly Developed 
Paragraphs, Special-Purpose Paragraphs. Unclear, Clear and Emphatic Sentences. 
Reasoning Critically. Reading Critically. Arguing Persuasively & Logically. Designing 
Documents. Writing in Online Communities.  
Presentation skills: Speaking Effectively. Interviews , telephonic, face to face, different 
kinds of interviews. Techniques and strategies for making and delivering a presentation, 
use of AV aids 
Academic Writing for Social and Natural Sciences: Goals of Writing, Audiences, Writing 
Tasks, Types of Writing: Abstract, Informative Report, Lab Report, Research Report, 
Project Reports, Technical report, short and long report, progressive report. 
Business letters of different kinds, good news, bad news, invitations, adjustments, 
resignation, letter for joining. Cover letter. CV and Resume with different types. 
Public Writing: Goals of Public Writing, Public Audiences, Public Writing Tasks, Types 
of Public Writing, Public Flyer, Letter to the Editor.  
Researching and Writing: Types of Research Writing, Developing a Research Question, 
proposal for a research, Developing a Preliminary Thesis, Creating a Research File and a 
Timeline, Reading and Note taking, Summarizing, Paraphrasing, and Synthesizing. 
Writing a Position Paper 
Reference Material: 
1. Writer's Companion – The Longman by Chris M. Anson, Robert A. Schwegler and 
Marcia F. Muth, Pearson Longman, 4th Edition 2007. ISBN10: 0-20556-252-3 
2. Technical English: Writing, Reading, and Speaking by Pickett and Laster. 8th Edition 
3. The Technical Writer’s Companion by Alred, Gerald, Charles T. Brusaw and Walter 
E. Oliu, 3rd Edition. ISBN 0-312-25978-6. 
4. Mecnakshi Raman & Sangeeta Technical Communication 
 
 
Semester-3 
 
 
 
Course Name: Object Oriented Programming 
 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 4 
 
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals 
 
Objectives: The course aims to focus on object-oriented concepts, analysis and software 
development. 
 
Course Outline:  
Evolution of Object Oriented (OO) programming, OO concepts and principles, problem 
solving in OO paradigm, OO programme design process, classes, methods, objects and 
encapsulation; constructors and destructors, operator and function overloading, virtual 
functions, derived classes, inheritance and polymorphism. I/O and file processing, 
exception handling 
 
Reference Material: 
1. C++ How to Program, 6/E  (Harvey & Paul) Deitel & Deitel ISBN-10: 0136152503 
ISBN-13: 9780136152507 Publisher: Prentice Hall  
2. Java How to Program, 7/E  
(Harvey & Paul) Deitel & Deitel ISBN-10: 0132222205 ISBN-13: 9780132222204 
Publisher: Prentice Hall 
 
 
Course Name: Computer Networks 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 4 
Prerequisites: None 
Objectives: To introduce students to the concept of computer communication. Analogue 
& digital transmission. Network Layers, Network models (OSI, TCP/IP) and Protocol 
Standards. Emphasis is given on the understanding of modern network concepts. 
Course Outline: Analogue and digital Transmission, Noise, Media, Encoding, 
Asynchronous and Synchronous transmission, Protocol design issues. Network system 
architectures (OSI, TCP/IP), Error Control, Flow Control, Data Link Protocols (HDLC, 
PPP). Local Area Networks and MAC Layer protocols (Ethernet, Token ring), 
Multiplexing, Switched and IP Networks, Inter-networking, Routing, Bridging, Transport 
layer protocols TCP/IP, UDP. Network security issues. Programming exercises, labs or 
projects involving implementation of protocols at different layers. 
Reference Material: 
1. Introduction to Computer Networks /4, A. S. Tanenbaum, Prentice Hall 2003 
2. Computer Networks and Internets, 5/E, 2008 
Douglas E. Comer, Purdue University ISBN-10: 0136061273 ISBN-13: 
9780136061274 Publisher: Prentice Hall 
3. Data and Computer Communications By William Stallings Published by Macmillan 
Pub. Co., 8th Edition 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Name: Differential Equations 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Calculus and Analytical Geometry 
Objectives: Develop fundamental skills of solving ordinary differential equations, and 
developing differential equations for real-world problems. 
Course Outline: Ordinary Differential Equations of the First Order: Geometrical 
Considerations, Isoclines, Separable Equations, Equations Reducible to Separable Form, 
Exact Differential Equations, Integrating Factors, Linear First-Order Differential 
Equations, Variation of Parameters. Ordinary Linear Differential Equations; 
Homogeneous Linear Equations of the Second Order, Homogeneous Second-Order 
Equations with Constant Coefficients, General Solution, Real Roots, Complex Roots, 
Double Root of the Characteristic Equation, Differential Operators, Cauchy Equation, 
Homogeneous Linear Equations of Arbitrary Order, Homogeneous Linear Equations of 
Arbitrary Order with Constant Coefficients, Non-homogeneous Linear Equations. 
Modelling of Electrical Circuits. Systems of Differential Equations. Series Solutions of 
Differential Equations. Partial Differential Equations: Method of Separation of variables, 
wave, Heat & Laplace equations and their solutions by Fourier series method. 
Reference Material: 
1. Michael Greenberg, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 1996, Prentice Hall 
publishers. 
2. Erwin Kreyzig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 7th edition, 1993, John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
3. Zill, Prindle, Weber and Schmidt, A First Course in Differential Equations, 1996, 
Brooks/Cole Publishing,  
4. Dennis G. Zill, Michael R. Cullen. Differential Equations with Boundary-Value 
Problems, 1996, Brooks/Cole Publishing,  
5. C. H .Edwards, David E. Penney, Elementary Differential Equations With 
Applications, 1993, Prentice Hall. 
 
 
Course Name: Basic Electronics 
Course Structure: Lectures: 2 / Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Electric Circuits 
Objectives: Introduction of Electronics 
Course Outline: 
Fundamentals of Semiconductor physics: Band theory, semiconductors (intrinsic and 
extrinsic), pn junction, pn junctions as a rectifier, clipper and clamper circuits, zener diode 
and voltage regulator, LED and LCD etc., Transistors: Bipolar Junction transistors, BJT 
biasing circuits, Q-point, BJT as a switch, BJT amplifiers, classes of amplifiers, power 
amplifiers, Metal oxide transistors, nMOS, pMOS and CMOS inverters circuits. 
Introduction to A/D and D/A conversion circuits 
Reference Material: 
1. University Physics by Freedman and Young (10 th and higher editions). 
2. College Physics by Resnick, Halliday and Krane (6th and higher edition) 
 
Course Name: Introduction to Statistical Theory 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: None 
Objectives: To introduce the concepts of data analysis, presentation, counting 
techniques, probability and decision making. 
Course Outline: Introduction to Statistics, Descriptive Statistics, Statistics in decision 
making, Graphical representation of Data Stem-and Lead plot, Box-Cox plots, measures 
of central tendencies and dispersion, moments of frequency distribution; Counting 
techniques, introduction to probability, sample space, events, laws of probability, 
Conditional probability and Baye’s theorem with application to random variable 
(Discrete and continuous) Binomial, Poisson, Geometric, Negative Binomial 
Distributions; Exponential Gamma and Normal distributions. Regression and Correlation, 
Estimation and testing of hypotheses, use of elementary statistical packages for 
explanatory Data analysis.  
Reference Material: 
1. Ronald Walpole, Myers, Myers, Ye, “Probability & Statistics for Engineers & 
Scientists”, 8th edition, 2008, Prentice Hall Publisher. 
2. Lay L. Devore, Probability and Statistics for Engineering and the Sciences, 2003, 
Duxbury Publishers. 
3. G. Cowan, Statistical Data Analysis, 1998, Clarendon, Oxford. 
Course Name: Introduction to Software Engineering 
Credit Hours: 3 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Paradigm/Programming 
Objectives: To study various software development models and phases of software 
development life cycle. The concepts of project management, change control, process 
management, software development and testing are introduced through hands-on Team 
Projects. 
Course Outline: Introduction to Computer-based System Engineering; Project 
Management; Software Specification; Requirements Engineering, System Modelling; 
Requirements Specifications; Software Prototyping; Software Design: Architectural 
Design, Object-Oriented Design, UML modelling, Function-Oriented Design, User 
Interface Design; Quality Assurance; Processes & Configuration Management; 
Introduction to advanced issues: Reusability, Patterns; Assignments and projects on 
various stages and deliverables of SDLC. 
Reference Material:  
1. Software Engineering 8E by Sommerville Addison Wesley, 2006  
2. Software Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach /7E, Roger Pressman, McGraw-Hill, 
2009 
 
Semester-4 
Course Name:   Data Structures and Algorithms 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 4 
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Paradigms 
Objectives: The course is designed to teach students structures and schemes, which 
allow them to write programs to efficiently manipulate, store, and retrieve data. Students 
are exposed to the concepts of time and space complexity of computer programs 
Course Outline:  
Introduction to data structures; Arrays, Stacks, Queues, Priority Queues, Linked Lists, 
Trees, and Graphs. Recursion, sorting and searching algorithms, Hashing, Storage and 
retrieval properties and techniques for the various data structures. Algorithm Complexity, 
Polynomial and Intractable Algorithms, Classes of Efficient Algorithms, Divide and 
Conquer, Dynamic, Greedy 
Reference Material: 
1. Data Abstraction and Problem Solving with C++, 2nd ed, Frank M. Carrano, Paul 
Helman, Robert Veroff, Addison-Wesley, 1998. 
2. Data Structures and Algorithms (SAMS teach yourself), Lafore, Sams Publishing, 
1999. 
3. Fundamentals of Data Structures in C++, Horowitz, Sahni, and Mehta, Computer 
Science Press, 1995. 
4. Data Structures in JAVA, Standish, Addison Wesley, 2000 
 
Course Name: Computer Organization and Assembly Language 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 4 
Prerequisites: Digital Logic Design 
Objectives: The main objective of this course is to introduce the organization of computer 
systems and usage of assembly language for optimization and control. Emphasis should be 
given to expose the low-level logic employed for problem solving while using assembly 
language as a tool. At the end of the course the students should be capable of writing 
moderately complex assembly language subroutines and interfacing them to any high 
level language. 
Course Outline: Microprocessor Bus Structure: Addressing, Data and Control, Memory 
Organization and Structure (Segmented and Linear Models), Introduction to Registers and 
Flags, Data Movement, Arithmetic and Logic, Programme Control, Subroutines, Stack 
and its operation, Peripheral Control Interrupts, Interfacing with high level languages, 
Real-time application. Objectives and Perspectives of Assembly Language, Addressing 
Modes, Introduction to the Assembler and Debugger, Manipulate and translate machine 
and assembly code, Describe actions inside the processing chip, Discuss operations 
performed by an instruction set, Write a fully documented program, Using an assembler of 
choice. 
Reference Material: 
1. Stallings, "Computer Organization & Architecture", 7th ed, Prentice HALL, 2006. 
2. Irvine, Assembly Language for Intel-based Computers, 5th ed, Prentice Hall, 2007. 
3. Computer Organization and Design, The Hardware/Software Interface, 4th ed, by 
David A. Patterson and John L. Hennessy, 2008. Elsevier Publishers. 
 
 
 
 
Course Name: Database Systems 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 4  
Prerequisites: Data Structures and Algorithms 
Objectives: The course aims to introduce basic database concepts, different data models, 
data storage and retrieval techniques and database design techniques. The course primarily 
focuses on relational data model and DBMS concepts. 
Course Outline: Basic database concepts; Entity Relationship modelling, Relational data 
model and algebra, Structured Query language; RDBMS; Database design, functional 
dependencies and normal forms; Transaction processing and optimization concepts; 
concurrency control and recovery techniques; Database security and authorization.  Small 
Group Project implementing a database. Physical database design: Storage and file 
structure; indexed files; b-trees; files with dense index; files with variable length records; 
database efficiency and tuning.  
Reference Material: 
1. Database Systems 8E, C.J.Date, Addison Wesley Pub. Co. (2004). 
2. Database Systems: A Practical Approach to Design, Implementation and Management 
5E, R.Connolly and P.Begg, Addison-Wesley Pub. Co (2009). 
3. Fundamentals of Database Systems, 5/E, Elmasri and Navathe, Addison-Wesley, ISBN: 
0-201-74153-9. 
 
 
 
Course Name: Wireless Communication 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites:  
Objectives:  
Course Outline:  
This course covers fundamental techniques in design and operation of first, second, and 
third generation wireless networks: cellular systems, medium access techniques, radio 
propagation models, error control techniques, handoff, power control, common air 
protocols (AMPS, IS-95, IS-136, GSM, GPRS, EDGE, WCDMA, cdma2000, etc), radio 
resource and network management. As an example for the third generation air interfaces, 
WCDMA is discussed in detail since it is expected to have a large impact on future 
wireless networks. This course is intended for graduate students who have some 
background on computer networks. 
Reference Material:  
1. W. Stallings, “Wireless Communications and Networks”, Prentice Hall, 2002. 
2. T.S. Rappaport, “Wireless Communications: Principles & Practice”, Second Edition, 
Prentice Hall, 2002. 
3. J. Schiller, “Mobile Communications”, Addison Wesley, 2000. 
4. V.K. Garg, “IS-95 CDMA and cdma 2000”, Prentice Hall PTR, 2000. 
5. J.P. Castro, “The UMTS Network and Radio Access Technology - Air Interface 
Techniques for Future Mobile Systems”, Wiley, 2001. 
6. H. Holma and A. Toskala, “WCDMA for UMTS Radio Access for Third Generation 
Mobile Communications”, John Wiley & Sons, 2001 
 
 
Course Name: Numerical Computing 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites:  Calculus and Analytical Geometry 
Objectives: On completion of this unit, students will be able to demonstrate programming 
proficiency using structured programming techniques to implement numerical methods for 
solutions using computer-based programming  techniques .using Matlab for all methods. The 
course must serve the purpose of scientific software development for science and engineering 
problems. 
Course Outline: The concepts of efficiency, reliability and accuracy of a method. 
Minimising computational errors. Theory of Differences, Difference Operators, Difference 
Tables, Forward Differences, Backward Differences and Central Differences. Mathematical 
Preliminaries, Solution of Equations in one variable, Interpolation and Polynomial 
Approximation, Numerical Differentiation and Numerical Integration, Initial Value Problems 
for Ordinary Differential Equations, Direct Methods for Solving Linear Systems, Iterative 
Techniques in Matrix Algebra, Solution of non-linear equations.  
Reference Material: 
1. Numerical Methods in Scientific Computing Germund Dahlquist and Åke Björck 
2. Numerical Methods for Scientific Computing : J.H. Heinbockel   
3. Numerical Analysis:  I.A. Khubaza 
4. Numerical Analysis and Programming : Shan S Kuo 
5. Numerical Analysis by Berden Fairs 
6. Numerical Analysis by Gerald 
 
 
 
 
Semester-5 
 
 
 
 
Course Name: Professional Practices                      
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: None 
Objectives: A Computing graduate as professional has some responsibilities with respect 
to the society. This course develops student understanding about historical, social, 
economic, ethical, and professional issues related to the discipline of Computing. It 
identifies key sources for information and opinion about professionalism and ethics. 
Students analyze, evaluate, and assess ethical and professional computing case studies. 
Course Outline: Introduction, Computing Ethics, Philosophy of Ethics, Ethics and the 
Internet. Intellectual Copy Right, Accountability and Auditing, Social Application of 
Ethics. 
Resources: 
1. Deborah G. Johnson, “Computer Ethics”, Pearson Education (2001) 3rd edition. 
2. Professional Issues in Software Engineering, M.F. Bott et. al. 
 
 
Course Name: Operating Systems 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 1  Credit Hours: 4 
Prerequisites: None  
Objectives: To help students gain a general understanding of the principles and concepts 
governing the functions of operating systems and acquaint students with the layered 
approach that makes design, implementation and operation of the complex OS possible. 
Course Outline: History and Goals, Evolution of multi-user systems, Process and CPU 
management, Multithreading, Kernel and User Modes, Protection, Problems of cooperative 
processes, Synchronization, Deadlocks, Memory management and virtual memory, 
Relocation, External Fragmentation, Paging and Demand Paging, Secondary storage, 
Security and Protection, File systems, I/O systems, Introduction to distributed operating 
systems. Scheduling and dispatch, Introduction to concurrency. Lab assignments involving 
different single and multithreaded OS algorithms. 
Reference Material: 
1. Applied Operating Systems Concepts, 7th Edition, Silberschatz A., Peterson, J.L., & 
Galvin P.C. 2004. 
2. Modern Operating Systems, 3rd Edition, Tanenmaum A.S., 2008. 
 
 
Course Name: Communication Skills 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0  Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: None  
Objectives: Enable the students to meet their real life communication needs.  
Course Outline: 
The seven C’s of communication, Levels of communication, The process of 
communication, Types of communication (in detail), Flow of communication, 
Communication Networks in an organization, Formal Network, Informal Network, 
Principals of effective communication and barriers to communication, Basic Skills (Writing, 
Listening, Speaking, Reading..). 
LISTENING SKILLS: What is listening? Types of listening, Objectives & Barriers to 
listening, Note taking tips. Improved by AV aids used & recommended by the teacher. 
ORAL/SPEAKING SKILLS: 
PRESENTATION SKILLS: Personality development (emphasis on content, style and 
pronunciation). Successful persuasive public speaking, Importance of oral communication, 
Effective Presentative strategies, organizing & preparing outline, visual aids. 
INTERVIEWS: Types of interviews, tips for successful interview. 
WRITING: Paragraph, Essay with different types, Letters & its types, memo writing, 
Reports, Proposal, Research paper, Term paper, Thesis, Review writing, minutes of 
meetings. 
READING SKILLS: Definition & Importance of reading, levels & requirements, how to 
improve reading skills & study skills as below. 
STUDY SKILLS: Skimming and Scanning, Intensive and extensive, Speed reading, 
Summary, main idea and critical summary. 
  
Reference Material: 
a) Grammar 
1. Practical English Grammar by A.J. Thomson and A.V. Martinet. Exercises. Third edition. 
Oxford University Press 1986. ISBN 0 19 431350 6 
b) Writing 
1. Intermediate by Marie-Chrisitine Boutin, Suzanne Brinand and Francoise Grellet. Oxford 
Supplementary Skills. Fourth Impression 1993. ISBN 019 435405 7 Pages 45-53 (note 
taking). 
2. Upper-Intermediate by Rob Nolasco. Oxford Supplementary Skills. Fourth Impression 
1992. ISBN 0 19 435406 5 (particularly good for writing memos, introduction to 
presentations, descriptive and argumentative writing). 
3. Mecnakshi Raman & Sangeeta Technical Communication. 
4. Murphy, Effective Business Communication, 7th edition.  
c) Reading 
1. Advanced.  Brian Tomlinson and Rod Ellis. Oxford Supplementary Skills. Third 
Impression 1991. ISBN 0 19 453403 0 
2. Reading and Study Skills by John Langan 
3. Study Skills by Riachard Yorky 
 
 
Course Name: Linear Algebra 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3, Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: None 
Objectives: To provide fundamentals of solution for system of linear equations, 
operations on system of equations, matrix properties, solutions and study of their 
properties. 
Course Outline: Vectors, Vector Spaces, Matrices & Determinants, Cofactor and Inverse, 
Rank, Linear Independence, Solution of system of Linear systems, Positive Definite 
matrix, Linear Transformations, Operations on matrices, Inner products, orthgonality and 
least squares, Eigenvalue & Eigenvectors. Applications to Systems of Equations and to 
Geometry, Singular Value Decomposition. 
Reference Material: 
1. Bernard Kolman, David Hill, Elementary Linear Algebra with Applications, 9th 
edition,  Prentice Hall PTR, 2007. 
2. Gilbert Strang, Strang, Brett Coonley, Andy Bulman-Fleming, Andrew Bulman
Fleming, Strang's Linear Algebra And Its Applications, 4th edition, Brooks/Cole, 2005 
3. Howard Anton, Chris Rorres, Elementary Linear Algebra: Applications Version, 9th 
edition, Wiley, 2005. 
4. David C. Lay, Linear Algebra and Its Applications, 2nd edition, Addison-Wesley, 
2000. 
 
Course Name: Web Design and Development 
Course Structure: Lectures: 2 / Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Fundamentals of Information Technology (required) 
Objectives: This course will extend the WWW Technologies and Web Based Applications 
architecture, development, deployment and management concepts studied in the course of 
Fundamentals of Information Technology. The instructor is expected to cover an in-depth 
treatment of the web technology and applications related topics including web standards, 
protocols, web applications architecture, web services, search engine architectures, content 
management, web2, and semantic web, to explore some of the technologies used for 
display, data access and processing, and to give the students practice in integrating these to 
produce a functional web-based system. 
Course Outline:  
In-depth study of World Wide Web architectures, protocols and standards (HTTP, HTML, 
xHTML, CGI, XML, WML, cHTML,  etc.), Web Technologies and Tools (such as 
scripting tools) for web application development and deployment (web servers, application 
servers, etc.), Web Based Applications including search engines and content management, 
management of large scale web based information systems, Web Services, Web2, Semantic 
Web, and Web3, principles of web site design, practical exercise in web site development. 
Reference Material: 
Suggested Text Books: 
1. Nuckles, Craig, Web Applications:  Concepts and Real World Design, Wiley 2006 
2. Programming the World Wide Web (4th Edition) (Paperback), by Robert W. Sebesta 
(Author), Paperback: 752 pages, Publisher: Addison Wesley; 4th edition (August 17, 
2007), ISBN-10: 0321489691  
Reference Material: 
1. Gosselin, Dan, et. al., The Web Warrior Guide to Web Design Technologies, Cengage 
Learning, 2003 
2. Zak, Diane, et. al., The Web Warrior Guide to Web Programming, Cengage Learning, 
2003 
3. Leasure, T.,  Bob Leasure and James Leasure, The Web Warrior Guide to Web 
Database Technologies, Cengage Learning, 2003 
4. Morrison, Mike and Joline Morrison, Database Driven Websites, 2/e, Cengage 
Learning,  2002 
5. Web Wizard series for various technologies, Addison-Wesley 
6. Jackson, J. C., Web Technologies:  A Computer Science Perspective, Pearson (LPE), 
2008 
7. Web Application Architecture: Principles, Protocols and Practices by Leon Shklar and 
Richard Rosen (Paperback - Oct 31, 2008), Paperback: 420 pages, Publisher: Wiley; 2 
edition (October 31, 2008), ISBN-10: 047051860X  
8. Web Engineering: The Discipline of Systematic Development of Web Applications by 
Gerti Kappel, Birgit Prýýll, Siegfried Reich, and Werner Retschitzegger (Paperback - 
Jul 5, 2006) 
 
 
Semester-6 
Course Name: Artificial Intelligence 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 4 
Prerequisites: Data Structures 
Objectives: This course focuses on the set of computational tools and techniques, which 
mimic the human decision-making process and capability. 
Course Outline: Introduction to Common Lisp. AI classical systems: General Problem 
Solver, rules, simple search, means-ends analysis. ELIZA, pattern matching, rule based 
translators, OPS-5. Knowledge Representation: Natural language, rules, productions, 
predicate logic, semantic networks, frames, objects, scripts. Search: Depth first search, 
breadth first search, best first search, hill climbing, min-max search, A* search. Symbolic 
Mathematics: student, solving algebra problems, translating English equations, solving 
algebraic equations, simplification rules, re-write rules, meta-rules, Macsyma, PRESS, 
ATLAS. Logic Programming: Resolution, unification, horn-clause logic, Prolog, Prolog 
programming. Sample case studies of shells and Knowledge Based Systems. A brief 
appreciation of state of the art computational techniques like neural networks, genetic 
algorithm, fuzzy sets. 
Reference Material: 
1. Artificial Intelligence by Luger, 4th edition Pearson Education.  
2. Russell and Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Aproach, 2nd ed, Pearson 
Education. 
 
Course Name: Design &Analysis of Algorithms 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Discrete Structure, Data Structures and Algorithms 
Objectives: Detailed study of the basic notions of the design of algorithms and the 
underlying data structures. Several measures of complexity are introduced. Emphasis on the 
structure, complexity, and efficiency of algorithms. 
Course Outline: Introduction; Asymptotic notations; Recursion and recurrence relations; 
Divide-and-conquer approach; Sorting; Search trees; Heaps; Hashing; Greedy approach; 
Dynamic programming; Graph algorithms; Shortest paths; Network flow; Disjoint Sets; 
Polynomial and matrix calculations; String matching; NP complete problems; 
Approximation algorithms. 
Reference Material: 
1. Introduction to Algorithms /2E, T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, and R. L. Rivest, MIT 
Press, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 2001. 
2. Algorithms in C++; Robert Sedgewick  
 
Course Name: Theory of Automata  
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures 
Objectives: The course aims to develop an appreciation of the theoretical foundations of 
computer science through study of mathematical & abstract models of computers and the 
theory of formal languages. Theory of formal languages and use of various abstract 
machines as ‘recognizers’ and parsing will be studied for identifying/validating the 
synthetic characteristics of programming languages. Some of the abstract machines shall 
also study as ‘Transducers’. 
Course Outline: Finite State Models: Language definitions preliminaries, Regular 
expressions/Regular languages, Finite automata (FAs), Transition graphs (TGs), NFAs, 
Kleene’s theorem, Transducers (automata with output), Pumping lemma and non regular 
language Grammars and PDA: Context free grammars, Derivations, derivation trees and 
ambiguity, Simplifying  CFLs , Normal form grammars and parsing, Decidability, 
Chomsky’s hierarchy of grammars Turing Machines Theory: Turing machines, Post 
machine, Variations on TM, TM encoding, Universal Turing Machine, Context sensitive 
Grammars, Defining Computers by TMs. 
Text Books/Reference Books: 
1. An Introduction to Formal Languages and Automata, By Peter Linz, 4th edition, Jones 
& Bartlett Publishers, 2006 
2. Theory of Automata, Formal Languages and Computation, By S. P. Eugene, Kavier, 
2005, New Age Publishers, ISBN (10): 81-224-2334-5, ISBN (13) : 978-81-224
2334-1. 
3. John Hopcroft and Jeffrey Ullman, Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and 
Computation, 2nd edition, 2001, Addison-Wesley. 
4. Introduction to Languages and the Theory of Computation, By John C. Martin3rd 
edition, 2002, McGraw-Hill Professional. 
 
 
Course Name: Fundamental of Data Mining 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Database Systems 
Objectives:  
Course Outline:  
Data-Mining Concepts, Preparing the Data, Data Reduction, Learning From Data, 
Statistical Methods, Decision Trees and Decision Rules, Artificial Neural Networks, 
Ensemble Learning, Cluster Analysis, Association Rules, Web Mining and Text Mining, 
Genetic Algorithms, Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic, Visualization Methods, Data Mining 
Tools: Weka, CBA and Yale, etc. 
Reference Material: 
1. Data Mining: Concepts, Models, Methods, and Algorithms by Mehmed 
2. Kantardzic, Wiley-IEEE Press; 2nd Edition (August 16, 2011). ISBN-10:0470890452 
3. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques, Third Edition (The Morgan Kaufmann  Series 
in Data Management Systems) by Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber and Jian Pei, Morgan 
Kaufmann; 3rd Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 0123814790 
4. Principles of Data Mining (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning) by David J. 
Hand, Heikki Mannila and Padhraic Smyth, A Bradford Book (August 1, 2001). ISBN
10: 026208290X 
 
 
Course Name: Distributed Database Systems 
Course Structure: Lectures: 2 / Labs: 1 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Introduction to Database Systems 
Objectives: Students will learn the usage of different design strategies for distributed 
databases, and will study query processing techniques as well as transaction management 
and concurrency control concepts used in such systems 
Course Outline:  
Introduction to Distributed Data Processing; Distributed DBMS Architecture; Distributed 
Database Design: Issues, Fragmentation and Allocation; Integrity Constraints, Distributed 
Query Processing; Query Decomposition and Data Localization; Query Optimization; 
Distributed Transaction Management and Concurrency Control; Distributed DBMS 
Reliability and Replication Techniques; Multi-database Systems.  
Reference Material: 
1. M.T. Ozsu, P. Valduriez (eds.): Principles of Distributed Database Systems (2nd  
Edition), Prentice Hall, 1999 
2. P. Bernstein and E. Newcomer, Principles of Transaction Processing. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 1997  
3. M. Buretta, Data Replication. Wiley, 1997   
4. R. Elmasri and S. Navathe. Fundamentals of Database 
Systems,Benjamin/Cummings. 
 
Semester-7 
Course Structure: Lectures: 2 / Labs: 1 
Course Name: Mobile and Application Development 
Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Web Technologies 
Objectives:  
Course Outline:  
What is Android? Installing and Configuring the Android SDK Manager, Creating Android 
Application, Anatomy of an Android Application. Eclipse. Fragments, Calling Built-In 
Applications Using Intents, Displaying Notifications. Components of a Screen, Adapting to 
Display Orientation, Managing Changes to Screen Orientation, Utilizing the Action Bar, 
Creating the User Interface. Listening for UI Notifications. Views, User Preferences. 
Persisting Data. Sharing Data. Sending SMS Messages. Getting Feedback. Sending E-mail. 
Displaying Maps, Consuming Web Services Using HTTP, Accessing Web Services. 
Creating Services. Threading. Android games Development, Publishing Android 
Applications. Handling Telephone Calls, Fonts 
Reference Material: 
1. Beginning Android 4 Application Development by Wei-Menge Lee, John Wiley & 
Sons, 2012 
2. Beginning Android 4 by Grant Allen, Apress, (2011), ISBN: 1430239840. 
3. Beginning Android games by Mario Zechner, Apress, (2011), ISBN:1430230428 
4. Pro Android 4 by Satya Komatineni and Dave MacLean, (2012), ISBN:1430239301 
Apress 
5. Professional Android 4 Application Development by Reto Meier, Wiley, (2012), 
ISBN:1118237226 
Course Name: Introduction to Sociology 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 0 
Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites:  
Objectives: This course will introduce students to the discipline of Sociology, its 
perspective, its basic concepts and principles, its methods of analysis and its major sub-fields. 
Through this introduction it is expected that students will begin to think in ways that take into 
account the social realm of thought, including the impact of social forces, social constraints, 
and social structure on an individual's thoughts and behaviours. The goals of the course are to 
encourage students to begin to think critically about the social world, to examine various life 
issues with a sociological lens, to 'problematize' social issues, and to spark the sociological 
imagination - "the ability to see the relationship between individual experiences and the 
larger society" (C. Wright Mills, 1959). 
Course Outline: 
Nature, scope and subject matter of Sociology, Brief historical development of Sociology, 
Introduction to Quranic Sociology, Society and community, Relationship with other social 
Sciences, Social Interaction Processes The study of social life, Exploring the global village, 
Sociology as a science, The Sociological imagination, The development of Sociology,  
Sociology, Structure and function of social institutions, Inter-relationships among various 
social institutions, Elements of culture, Organization of culture, cultural relativism, sub 
cultures, ethnocentrism, Socialization and personality, Role and status, Socialization, Culture 
and personality 
Reference Material: 
Recommended Texts: 
1. Horton and Hungt, (2004), Sociology, 6th edition, McGraw Hill 
2. Tischler, Hnry L, (2002), Introduction to Sociology, 7th edition Horcourt 
3. Macionis, John J and Plummer, Ken, (2005), Sociology, A Global International, 3rd  
Edition, Prentice Hall. 
Reference Material: 
1. Kendall, Diana, (2001), Sociology in our times, 32nd Edition, Wadsworth.  
2. James. M. Hensline, (1997), Sociology, Needhan Heigwb, Massachusetts, USA.  
3. George J. Brgjar, Michael P. Soroke, (1997)  
 
 
 
 
 
Course Name:  Parallel and Distributed Computing 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Data Communications and Computer Networks 
Objectives:  
Course Outline: 
Why use parallel and distributed systems? Why not use them? Speedup and Amdahl's Law, 
Hardware architectures: multiprocessors (shared memory), networks of workstations 
(distributed memory), clusters (latest variation). Software architectures: threads and shared 
memory, processes and message passing, distributed shared memory (DSM), distributed 
shared data (DSD). Possible research and project topics, Parallel Algorithms, Concurrency 
and synchronization, Data and work partitioning, Common parallelization strategies, 
Granularity, Load balancing, Examples: parallel search, parallel sorting, etc. Shared-Memory 
Programming: Threads, Pthreads, Locks and semaphores, Distributed-Memory 
Programming: Message Passing, MPI, PVM. Other Parallel Programming Systems, 
Distributed shared memory, Aurora: Scoped behavior and abstract data types, Enterprise: 
Process templates. Research Topics 
Reference Material: 
1. B. Wilkinson and M. Allen, Parallel Programming: Techniques and Applications Using 
Networked Workstations and Parallel Computers, 1/e, Prentice Hall, 1999. 
2. W. Stevens, Advanced Programming in the Unix Environment, Addison Wesley, 1993 
 
 
Course Name: Compiler Construction 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 0 Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Theory of Automata and Formal Languages 
Objectives: At the end of the course students should understand the overall structure of a 
compiler, and will know significant details of a number of important techniques commonly 
used. They will be aware of the way in which language features raise challenges for 
compiler builders. 
Course Outline: Compiler techniques and methodology. Organization of compilers. 
Lexical and syntax analysis. Parsing techniques. Object code generation and optimization, 
detection and recovery from errors. Contrast between compilers and interpreters. 
Reference Material: 
1. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools By Alfred V. Aho, Ravi Sethi, Jeffrey D. 
Ullman, Contributor Jeffrey D. Ullman ,Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 2nd edition,1987 
Original from the University of Michigan 
2. Modern Compiler Design, By Dick Grune, Henri E. Bal, Ceriel J. H. Jacobs, Koen G. 
Langendoen, John Wiley, 2000. 
3. Modern Compiler Implementation in C, By Andrew W. Appel, Maia Ginsburg, 
Contributor Maia Ginsburg,  Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
4. Modern Compiler Design by Dick Grune, Henri E. Bal, Ceriel J. H. Jacobs, Koen G. 
Langendoen, 2003, John Wiley & Sons. 
Semester-8 
Course Name: Computer Graphics 
Course Structure: Lectures: 2 / Labs: 1 
Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming , Visual Programming 
Objectives: Study of various algorithms in computer graphics and their implementation in 
any programming language. 
Course Outline: Graphics hardware. Fundamental algorithms. Applications of graphics. 
Interactive graphics programming — graph plotting, windows and clipping, and 
segmentation. Programming raster display systems, Differential Line Algorithm, panning and 
zooming. Raster algorithms and software — Scan-Converting lines, characters and circles. 
Scaling, Rotation, Translation, Region filling and clipping. Two and three dimensional 
imaging geometry (Perspective projection and Orthogonal projection) and transformations. 
Curve and surface design, rendering, shading, colour and animation. 
Reference Material: 
1. Computer Graphics, Principles and Practice, J. D. Foley, A. van Dam, S. K.     
Feiner and J. F. Hughes, Addison-Wesley ISBN: 0-201-12110-7. 
2. Computer Graphics, F.S.Hill, Maxwell MacMillan ISBN: 0-02-354860-6. 
3.  Interactive Computer Graphics: Functional, Procedural and Device-level 
methods; Peter Burger and Duncan. F. Gillies; Addison-Wesley, (2003) 
Course Name: Information Security 
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 0 
Credit Hours: 3 
Prerequisites: Data Communication and Computer Networks 
Objectives:  
Course Outline:  
Basic notions of confidentiality, integrity, availability; authentication models; protection 
models; security kernels; Encryption, Hashing and Digital 33 Signatures; audit; intrusion 
detection and response; database security, host based and network-based security issues 
operational security issues; physical security issues; personnel security; policy formation 
and enforcement; access controls; information flow; legal and social issues; identification 
and authentication in local and distributed systems; classification and trust modeling; risk 
assessment 
Reference Material: 
1. Computer Security: Art and Science, Matthew Bishop 
2. Cryptography and Network Security by William Stalling 6th Edition, 2012 
3. Principles of Information Security 3rd E by Michael E. Whitman and Herbert J. Mattord 